---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-03-01T11:30:02.455Z'
dateModified: '2016-03-01T11:28:57.857Z'
title: ''
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-02-29-b8560613-bdde-4218-b2d0-60b00acdd0b5.md
published: true
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
url: b8560613-bdde-4218-b2d0-60b00acdd0b5/index.html
_type: Article

---
BY NOW 

BYNOWBYNOWBYNOW

Prologue.

I wish it were as simple for the inhabitants of our planet to turn over a new leaf,and enter a New Age,as it was for me to leave winter darkness behind,and fly to Kerala in early January of another year.The first time I saw Kobalam was on Google Earth,so when I flew in through haze that cleared into sunshine on the coast,I immediately oriented to the red-and-white-striped lighthouse that swept into view between seas of coconut palms,and the ocean's rolling waves.

I recognised Hotel Seaweed just inland,and the soon-to-be-familiar window to my shady room with its ceiling fan,its very own wall-gekko,and its streams of miniscule ants seeking sweetness.I could hear waves rolling in all night -- as I did as a child at my grandma's -- and over the next few days,lay down on the peaceful sands as I listened to their never-ending dance on an echoing shore. 

The beaches are five minute walk down a steep road as in an old Cornish fishing village -- except here road tarmac crumbles,dark heads waggle, goats nibble at ragged festival decorations,thin men sweat along red earthed paths under impossible loads,and I recall other factors : mosquitos,detritus,beggars. 

It is a poor fishing village that western travellers originally took to because of its cheap,laid-back picturesqueness,then this symbiotic process flowered into hotels,restaurants, and business services in the ever-creative energy of India. It is an ayuvedic base,yoga base,tour base.Hot resort with short,hectic season. 

Busily into new year,the excesses of that seasonal shift from darkness into light fade with time into my reflection,renewal,and resolve.I walk into the chill of the a/c Kingfisher Bar for a mineral water,and,so far,am not tempted to have one last glass of wine before the end of the world - for I am now away from the madness of capitalist consumption,fully immersed in the surrealism of India. 

For example.Seaweed Hotel manager,Soma,invited me to observe his other job,at a disused school.He organises a government facility teaching programme for poor villagers: how to pay for your electricity etc by e-bill,registering with your Blue rice ration identity cards -- or Red card for BLP (below poverty line).

Soma's friend gives me a lift to the event on the back of a scooter,where he is setting up a single computer display for the two-hundred village women who stood animatedly in expectant groups as us two men went off to try and find chairs.The school was a cavernous shell with concrete floors awash with stale water,and one blackboard,but chairs were magic'd up,as were microphones,so that a series of deafening speeches could begin,punctuated by applause.

These speeches stopped as one woman began to shout abuse at the committee of men -- which seemed to signal that from docility,they could now all leap forward waving their cards.Registration began in a lather of bejewelled spleandour,as the disempowered made claim to their rights -- for though homage is paid to the Goddess,the reality for village women is otherwise.

I joined Soma and friends afterwards at a local thali café,where he was at pains to inform me that the woman behind the till was also secretary of his programme -- and then I got the story that in fact he himself was an orphan who had worked hard to better himself,and had borrowed money to set up his programme,but the bank wanted to take his house in lieu of his debt.I said I had little spare money,but I felt he was testing me out,as next he wanted to know if I was married? 'No,not legally married.'I replied.Ah,so did I want to marry an Indian woman with house,and live here six months of the year? 'Sounds great Soma,but my girlfriend Grace,my longterm partner,may object?' 'No need to tell her then,'he laughed,but I saw that he was not joking as he checked his mobile and made a comment in Malayalam to his friends. I let it pass,not saying to him that my ex-wife and my grown son Jay may object also.

We caught a rickshaw to the beach,to wander off in different directions.Proud Soma paid for everything,so I must remember to donate to him on his website.

I headed for a quiet spot,and lay down to the sound of the surf, with many crows and parrots calling from palms above that rippled and shimmied their leaves in the wind - a combined green chorus that sounded like heavy rainfall.

A coconut palm pushes slender trunk high into the sky to starburst a crown of feather-leathery leaves,with dangling bunches of testicular coconuts. You can hear the heavy crash of a leaf suddenly falling at night.Folks die from coconuts landing on their head.The ubiquitous coconut tree is used for building,heating, thatching,food,drink,art,craft,and ritual.It is synonymous with Keralan culture. 

So then,I mused,what drove our western capitalism so far away from nature? Was it scientific rationalism?Protestant ethics? Industrial revolution?Perhaps this process started earlier,as hunter-gatherers became domesticated Neolithic farmers, and will only end when there are no more 'resources' left to plunder. How did we reach this?Are we a greedy cancer with a Freudian death wish?

I walked down to the sea to stand in the surf and watch fishermen at work in pairs of dark wooden boats,like heavy war canoes,gradually drawing a shared bell-net back to shore,whilst swimmers pound at the water with open palms to drive the fish in as they yell a primaeval cry:'Aaaahbeeeeeee,Aaaahbeeeee',in this ancient way of life that survives along the whole of the Keralan coastline.

Fish are sorted,and crows wait,as jabbering turns to haggling.The largest fish,as bulky as a small human,are individually hoisted into a basket that is balanced on a woman's head,then taken off to be sold to one of the many restaurants that cater for Westerners along the ocean promenade.As a customer,you sit in the shade overlooking the sea as the whole world passes before you on the far side of the potted palms : gazing at white new arrivals,at the toasted-up soon-to-be-departed, the ten-dozen-eggs-balanced-on-his-head wallah,the wafer thin beggar,muscular surfy-with-his-board,crab-on-all-fours beggar,bikini girls.

And sitting with you in the restaurant: some American travellers,a yogi from Peru,twins from Thailand,a wrinkly couple from Manchester, Dutch, Russians, and a girl from Sutton - my elfin neighbour at the Seaweed Hotel who,bravely travelling alone,gets hassled.She has silvery teeth-braces and tattoos,says her name is Doris Morris.Truely.I say my name is Jack Jones,which it really is too.

'Honestly?On your own then,are you?'

'Yes,but I have a partner back home in the UK.'

'Me too,'she said,taking off her sunglasses to squint at me with a silver smile.

Down at the ocean,gaggles of fully-dressed Indian tourists frolic in the waves. Dark bodies silhouetted by surf gather together in excited heaps to dip and flounder in teasing waves,cameras at the ready,playing with an easy joy.

It must be time for me to walk to the sea,leave my possessions in a pile,and swim in to deep water.They say we are all two-thirds water,and the sea is a biological home.A sea of consciousness.I dive in,but catch a breaking wave too late,and it pushes me about like a puppet,so I swim further out to slowly spin like a spiral nebula floating face upwards at the sky as gathering breakers pulse past in the depths of the sea below,to tumble in a crashing roar onto the land.

By the time I walked back to my clothes -- flipflops,teeshirt,shorts -- the sun had dried them.The rupees are still in my pocket,along with Seaweed door keys. No one would steal from a swimmer while in sight of the restaurants,so I redress a sun set,as the lighthouse begins to beam into the gathering darkness of what was about to be the final evening of a wild temple-festival week of celebration.

Excitement is in the air,for after a Hindu temple dance ritual from a Shaman,an image of the goddess Kali will be carried in procession to be cast on the ocean. It is perhaps a little too late for such protective blessings,as much of this coast will be lost to the sea in a twinkle of this eon - but locals are being circumspect.

The local temple is a small gem in a natural amphitheatre.Doris from Sutton, that dark elf with many tattoos,is there already,so I join her on the front row of the crowded steps, and do not have to wait long before twenty-drummers set up a pounding rhythm that reverberates in my solar plexus.Quite soon they are all shining with sweat on dark bodies,and swaying to the bursts of fireworks.

Shaman emerges from the temple with an image of the goddess strapped to his head like a vast sail.He makes rushes towards the drummers,then retreats back, stepping lightly under his deity-personification regalia,as he circles and re-circles the temple.Two hours later,circling faster,his eyes are starting to pop,as he dances ankle-deep in flower petals that his all-attentive entourage are endlessly showering him with,basket after basket,in continuous stream.

Drums grow wilder,thunderflashes ring out.Shaman's tongue starts to drool, and he growls like a dog.Right on time he topples like a sailboat hitting a reef, and they catch him as he twitches in semi-consciousness,having become the embodiment of Kali.So I am surprised as they dump him,to become absorbed in his deified headpiece - for it is that they take in power-blessing to the ocean. 

Doris Morris and I join in,dancing down the steep hill in a blaze of celebration, hoping not to get caught by a thunderflash.A dancing drunk,who I recognise as a local rickshaw driver,leads the procession down to the sea.There,three other elaborate sailboat-demons,with horrifying fans and mirror-shades,appear from the darkness to whirl perilously close to the massing tourists and their videos.

But the sea comes in fast,so the embodiment of Kali,with mala, paste, incense, and petals,is quickly carried by four men into the waves, to be ritually dunked again and again.Then tourist get pushed back,drummers repound,fireworks shoot through the air,and the procession winds back uphill.Suddenly its over.

We turn off at Seaweed, and agree to visit the lighthouse together tomorrow at 11am - but I hear drumming waves,and feel the wavering of many voices.

I am feeling clear-headed by morning.11am arrives,but Doris does not. I wait ten minutes before climbing a converging spiral stairway to the top.Today, the view from the lighthouse is fantastic,so I breathe in deeply and feel the world - before spotting the girl from Sutton down below,the speck of a biped. When I get down she is perched on a rock.Ornithologically,she is a busy blackbird to my meditative heron.She says she forgot,and then remembered,that we were to meet -- but is moving to a quieter hotel,and is sure that we will bump into each other.Good move.It is good that we spent time together at the festival.

I think it is time I dunked my head in the ocean again,and am just drying myself off to sunbathe,when Soma passes by on the beach,clutching papers that he decided he wants to give me -- photocopies of newspaper articles reporting that banks are in process of evicting his family from their home.I read how the government charity he worked for is defaulting on payment,thus his debt.His entreprenurial streak means he borrowed heavily,but the government deal collapsed.I have the feeling he wants my help in any way.Grasping at straws.

I went to bed early, and got up at dawn.It was almost still dark at that hour, and a muzzein was calling.I walked up the street towards a sky spread with colour,and surprised the few street people who were awake.I was dressed all in white cotton,so perhaps they thought they had seen a ghost.As I passed down a filthy alley, a thin man came towards me with a grubby turban piled on his head which took up all available space.He raised his arms in the air as if to hug me,but then went on,looking straight through me as if I were that ghost.

As I walked across headland towards the outskirts of the local fishing port, I passed by a crowd of people silently collecting water,and washing themselves, at the ancient local stone tank.I could avoid the hassle of going into town if I headed for the promentary before the port,so I took a walk across wasteland between two mosques - their domes shining with sunlit crescent moons atop - but then I saw that I was passing through the dispossessed: scores of people living in tiny woven shelters - like two playing cards leaning together from the apex - now stirring themselves into another day.One old lady was awake enough to approach me with an extended palm,but I patted my pocket to show I carried nothing except my doorkey,so she shrugged in resignation.

This happened many times as I walked along the rubbish-strewn sea front, where I was joined by a large black goat who was content to play the devil by accompanying this white man home towards the lighthouse,that caught the rays of the rising sun,as I considered us two beasts,together on this new day.

I thought it time we re-evaluated what it means to be human at species level, beyond existing cultural paradigms,by relearning to see what is human as part of nature,rather than set above or against nature.We